and so today i wanted to talk to you
guys a little bit about
conscientiousness
and so um i know this is kind of weird
but like i got this question a year ago
like literally like
a year ago or maybe even over a year ago
and um i i know this sounds bizarre but
i actually did not have an answer so
people
kept on asking me like how do i improve
my conscientiousness
so i've been working on it for like a
year and trying to figure out like
reading papers on on personality
assessment you know like reading
some of these old texts on yoga um
and things like that so in trying to
figure out like okay how can we improve
conscientiousness is there a way to do
it
so came up with a couple of theories and
then tried to test them out with a
couple of people over the last
few years what does it mean i know we'll
we'll um
uh we'll get into i'll explain what all
that is and so then tested it with a few
people and it turns out that it actually
does kind of work
at least anecdotally so that's what i
want to kind of talk to you guys about
today
so this is going to be we're going to
use um you know like
i'm going to draw a little bit so let's
kind of dive in
okay so the first thing to understand is
that
um so when we look at different kinds of
different people
we have different personalities or
different kind of cognitive traits or
styles
and in the east we look at systems like
ayurveda or traditional chinese medicine
which will use elements
to describe what kind of person someone
is um so they'll say that like for
example
a vata person is like a wind type and so
their mind is like the wind so it
it blows hard in one direction and then
like changes direction easily
so vatas are people who get bored who's
easily pick things up very quickly
they can be very passionate about things
for like 15 minutes and then it kind of
like
you know isn't stable isn't consistent
so that's where the eastern system
in the western system there's one really
good uh
validated model of personality and that
is the five
factor model and so the five factor
model basically
studied people's personalities and what
they found using a technique called
factor analysis
is that personality tends to cluster in
five different
groups okay so these groups are
extraversion
openness agreeableness conscientiousness
and neuroticism
and so what do these five factors mean
so extroversion
is like how extroverted or introverted
you are
um so people who have high extraversion
like tend to get
relaxed with other people they draw
energy from other people
people who have low extroversion prefer
to be like by themselves
um it doesn't necessarily have anything
to do with how many friends you make or
how charismatic you are it's just sort
of
you know what you prefer so openness is
like is a tendency to like
openness new experiences so you tend to
be like open-minded
as opposed to like a little bit more
traditional
agreeableness is like how likely you are
to get along with other people and like
kind of
be malleable or flexible with your
thinking
it doesn't mean that you're nice or mean
it just means that like you kind of
you know are pretty like open mind uh
you're willing to sort of
change your views to accommodate others
um
and then we get to conscientiousness so
this is kind of a big thing in the
gaming community because people who like
so this is a cool thing about the gaming
community is that a lot of people
nowadays who like read the internet
are actually like amateur psychologists
which i think is fantastic so you guys
you know do
a lot of research you guys read a lot of
stuff on the internet you watch
educational videos and then one of the
things that comes up is this trait of
conscientiousness so conscientiousness
is your ability to sort of
focus on a task for extended periods of
time
um it also governs things like impulse
control so people with low
conscientiousness tend to be impulsive
and have trouble with follow-through
whereas people with high
conscientiousness tend to be um
you know like disciplined organized and
will follow through
and so um one of the interesting things
is that like people tend to think that
certain
attributes of uh you know certain
attributes are better than others
so generally speaking a lot of like the
gaming community feels like they have
low conscientiousness and therefore they
like
lost the lottery right so if you're kind
of born or nurtured in
in a way where your personality forms
with high conscientiousness
you're actually okay doing things like
delaying gratification working hard
working towards a goal and following
through and then there's
us who's like well we don't we're not
good at that i'm kind of lazy i'm
undisciplined
and so people ask me the question is we
were you know talking about the five
factors like how do i
increase my conscientiousness so that's
when what today's lecture is going to be
about
and the last uh attribute is actually
neuroticism which is your tendency to
worry so people may think that
neuroticism which is like
your tendency to like suffer up here is
a bad thing
and it certainly causes suffering but
there are a lot of things that show that
neuroticism is actually an adaptive
trait
so people with super low neuroticism are
what i think of as like the classic
pothead
like sit around all day do nothing like
not really worry about anything like
they don't get worried about stuff
they're just super chill
and so as a result they don't get
motivated to do things because
you know they don't really care about
the consequences
and um so for example doctors or
actually medical students
is a better way to put it tests very
high in neuroticism and hit very high in
conscientiousness
and the reason for that is because like
they were the kids that were worried
about getting a b
on a test when they were in college
which pushed them to study like on
friday nights
instead of going to parties and they're
also kind of hard working so like
that combination of traits is what sort
of allows people to like
be successful medical students or get
into medical school
so it's not like high neuroticism is
better than low neuroticism and oddly
enough it's not like
low conscientiousness is better than
high conscientiousness
but in our society we tend to select
or reward people who have high
conscientiousness
so that gets to the crux of today's
lecture which is that if i have low
conscientiousness
am i sol am i screwed
or is there something that i can do to
boost conscientiousness
and so people basically think if i have
low conscientiousness like
you know i drew the short straw in life
what can i do about it
so it took me a little while um
but it actually turns out that you can
improve conscientiousness
or at least i think so and here's the
best way that i've been able to kind of
figure out how
okay so let's start by thinking about
what actually happens in the mindset of
someone who has low conscientiousness
okay
so um when we're thinking about like
conscientiousness like
oh sorry yes let's think about low
versus high conscientiousness
so let's say that like it's a wednesday
afternoon and i'm done with my classes
and i've got two choices
i can play apex legends or
i can study for my like test next
tuesday
right and so in the mind of someone who
has high conscientiousness it's a little
bit easier
for them to study instead of like play a
game and
um if we think about it like i have two
impulses right so like one
impulse is like what i want to do and
one impulse
is like what i don't want to do we're
not going to say it's good for me or not
good for me because the first thing to
understand is like
the impulses are what's what i want to
do and what i don't want to do
and so you kind of get distracted um and
you end up going towards ipex legends
right so if you have high
conscientiousness you choose the thing
that you don't want to do
you have low conscientiousness you
basically give in to the thing that you
want to do
so you have this impulse to play a video
game and you give in to it
so if we kind of think about it is there
any way to train ourselves
to do what we don't
or not not do what we don't want to do
is there any way to train ourselves
to avoid doing the thing that we want to
do
and there's kind of a a subtle answer
what we really mean by that is
is there anything that i can do that
will
set myself and what i want aside
because that's basically what we're
doing right so if i want to play a video
game that's like prioritizing me
and like can we set that thinking aside
in favor of something else
how do we train our minds to set aside
what we want
in favor of like what's good for us and
so the subtle thing there
is that it's not necessarily a choice
between what's
good for me and what i want it's just
the key act if you look at the cognitive
act it's actually setting aside what you
want which is the important thing it's
the impulse control
which is the important thing and so
conscientiousness is associated with
with higher degrees of impulse control
and so the funny thing is that the
answer is actually right in the word
okay so if we think about
conscientiousness what do we when we
think about a person who's conscientious
what does that mean right so if we think
about like what are the different term
what are the different ways in which we
use that term to describe people
so the first okay so people say
aware conscious so it's not necessarily
conscious
right so it's it's like they think about
people who are like hard-working
but when when she think when we also
think about we think about people who
are caring like so if we think about a
person who's like very conscientious
that person is like
thoughtful about other people and so the
funny thing
there's a really simple way to do to
boost conscientiousness which is just to
be
thoughtful for other people or to i know
it sounds kind of weird but like to just
be a nice person
to be a good person to try to put other
people first to be selfless
and so this is really subtle because if
you think about it like when i do
something for someone else like let's
say i've got like
a pizza right and i've got like this a
whole pizza to myself
and if i think about it i'm sort of like
okay well let me think about what i can
do for someone else
i can eat the whole pizza myself or i
can share the pizza with someone else
and in that moment i have an impulse
let's say it's eat the pizza all by
myself
and what i'm doing when i when i care
about other people in a very like
thoughtful and deliberate way
is i'm setting aside my own impulses so
i want you guys to think
about helping other people and how
helping other people
almost certainly comes at a cost to
yourself
right you have to give something up in
order to help someone else
so if you share something that you have
you know you lose half of it if i
have a friend who's sick and i make them
like you know chicken noodle soup or
whatever like
lentil stew whatever and i like bring it
over there i lose like an hour two of my
time i can't play video games during
that time
i have to go and do something for
someone else i essentially expend
effort at a cost to myself for the
benefit of another person
and i know it sounds kind of weird but
if you really look at what happens in
the mind of someone who helps another
person
there's a really really key common
element
which is the avoidance or restraining
your impulse to benefit yourself
right so if i do anything that's nice
for someone else it has to come at a
cost to me
and that's actually a really wonderful
thing because that is what allows us
to train conscientiousness okay
so let's kind of think about that so
then like the tricky thing about the
personality models
is that um you know people also look at
things like empathy right
and so they say oh isn't helping other
people
empathy isn't that what makes you an
empathic human being and the short
answer is
not really and this is why it's a subtle
there's a lot of nuance here
so empathy is the capacity to feel
what someone else is feeling and so
people who are naturally
empathic naturally like or more helpful
towards other people
that's not what we're talking about
right so what i'm actually talking about
the best example of what i'm talking
about
is the altruistic sociopath so i don't
know if you guys know this but
sociopathy is another like personality
kind of scale it doesn't really fit into
the five factor model or
it maps onto the five factor model in
its own way it's sort of like low
agreeableness maybe a certain amount of
conscientiousness
but the altruistic sociopath is actually
like what we're going to look at to
understand this
so i don't know if you guys know this
but there are a lot of people who are
like really really good people who are
not
empathic they just choose to be good
people
so i've worked with some of these people
and a lot of times like the problem with
sociopaths is that
the ones that get like so if you look at
incarceration rates and stuff like that
sociopathy is like higher in a prison
population but the tricky thing there
there's there's some
evidence that suggests that like the
sociopaths who wind up in prison
are the ones that like get caught and
aren't actually very good at it
um and so they actually may have like a
lower iq so so you it is possible to
have these like altruistic sociopaths
and i
see these a lot so i work with a lot of
c-suite executives and these people test
very highly on the sociopathy scale
i myself test highly on the sociopathy
scale psychiatrists actually routinely
test highly on the sociopathy scale
surgeons test highly on the sociopathy
scale
it's kind of strange right so if you
think about what what is it that
why are psychiatrists high on the
sociopathy scale it's because in a sense
we have
like a very protective or low level of
empathy and what i mean by that is that
like
when i'm sitting with someone with
depression i can't let that person's
depression
like wash over and affect me i actually
need a barrier or it helps
if like i can look at their depression
like clinically without feeling
sad like with them and then feeling like
helpless with them
so instead of feeling feeling that
empathic helplessness it's actually
protective for me to like
be insulated from that and so if you
look at an altruistic sociopath what you
see is someone who
does a lot of things for other people
but
also doesn't do it because of empathy
so they do it sort of cognitively right
so what they do is like eat
up here what they say is like they wake
up in the morning and they're like okay
what can i do
oh this will be like something i can do
for someone else and like that's a good
thing
it's not based on a feeling it's sort of
based on a cognitive process
of choosing to set someone else
above you okay and so this is the key
thing about boosting conscientiousness
is people look at it and they say like
okay
it's hard for me to train myself to like
not watch youtube and study ahead
instead i completely agree that's really
hard it's like fighting an uphill battle
the trick is to use altruism
is your tool like that's going to be
essentially like the weights that you
practice with
right so what i want you guys to
understand is that if your conscientious
is low
conscientiousness is low do stuff for
other people
very simply right so in that process
what you're gonna have to do is set
aside
parts of yourself in favor of other
people and by doing that what you're
gonna train
in your mind is the capacity to set
aside what you want
and so and the cool thing is if you look
at the gaming population like
this is actually something that's really
awesome about us is that we actually
are really good at helping other people
like you guys can get off your ass if it
involves like doing something
substantive for someone else so if we
look at that motivational hump
that you need to get over to train your
conscientiousness
once you throw someone else into the
picture it actually becomes a lot easier
so just to kind of summarize you can
absolutely
train conscientiousness and the way that
you do it is by being
a conscientious human being which is to
be like
nice towards other people and to try to
do things for them
and the really fascinating thing about
this discovery is that this is not like
a new idea right so
if you really think about it like in the
eastern or karmic religions they talk
about karma
or karma and what they say is like what
goes around comes around right so they
sort of say that
if you do good things for other people
like your life will be improved
and that's really weird right so like if
you want to assume there's some sort of
like
cosmic principle or god or someone who's
you know using omnipotence to benefit
people that they deem to be good
that system sort of makes sense but we
don't really have any
evidence of any of that so let's just
scrap all that sort of religious stuff
let's try to understand is there like an
actual worldly observation
that supports this theory of karma which
is that like if you do
good by other people your life will be
improved and the funny thing is that
this revelation about conscientiousness
is like the perfect
link that explains that because what the
theory of karma essentially discovered
like thousands of years ago
was that when i do things for other
people i am in training my
conscientiousness
and by doing things for other people i'm
training my mind to be
more restrained i'm training my mind to
not be a victim to my own desires
i'm training my mind to be less
impulsive
i am being the controller of my mind
instead of the mind being the controller
of me
and what they realize is that the people
who consistently do things for other
people
will i don't know if they put these two
pieces together but they made the
observation that people who consistently
do things for other people
their lives start to improve and the
reason for that is really simple it's
because as you train your
conscientiousness
like you're able to study more easily
you're able to like
work harder and clean and be like have
better discipline and better follow
and then naturally as a consequence of
that happening then people like start
doing better in their jobs they start
doing better in their families they
start
like they start being more respected
like there are a lot of positive things
that come out of that
and so it's it's really kind of
fascinating because like the last thing
that i just
kind of want to say is that it's
interesting that karma is like so you
specific
and what i mean by that is like how on
earth in a cosmic
level does me like helping a lady with
her groceries
improve my life like that doesn't make
any sense
right there's no like cosmic energy that
is going to like wrap around and get to
me like we don't have any evidence of
that so if we look at it
how does the theory of karma work it the
only way the theory of karma
can work is actually through you because
you're the only common element
like if i help an old lady over here and
then my life gets better over here
what's the dot that connects
these two things it's you and so the
medium
of action for karma must be the
individual
and once we realize that then we realize
oh [ __ ] like that makes perfect sense
right because
now if we look at the the medium of like
how we improve our lives through helping
others it has to be through us
there has to be a change within our
brain or body but let's assume brain
because that's usually what
you know is responsible for stuff so
there had you know there has to be a
change in your brain
that connects helping an old lady with
her groceries with like improving your
life
and i think that missing link is
literally this this piece of
conscientiousness
so it's really fascinating because you
know if we look at like how to improve
your life
we've got this like theory that's
thousands of years old
which has sort of survived the test of
time right so if you think if you look
at it
like there's a darwinian effect for
concepts
in human history so the concepts that
tend to be like more reliable and
successful will be the ones that get
propagated through time
and the concepts that are like not
reliable
won't get propagated through time right
so if you look at religions for example
like horus and zeus aren't like
any better than like you know whatever
god
was around like you know in other
cultures so there's like
there's a sense that religions will be
born and die because
those particular like figures won't
don't add anything it's some of these
core concepts from religion which will
actually last through time
so the theory of karma has been saying
this for thousands of years and what i
think is super cool
is that now that we understand
personality analysis we see this
interesting link
that okay so the conscientiousness and
doing things for other people and
improving your own life
actually is like kind of explained
through our current understanding
of like validated science around
personality
so at the end of the day how do you
improve your life
how do you improve your
conscientiousness how do you become a
hard
worker when you can't restrain your
impulses and you can't do it for
yourself
you recruit a certain amount of altruism
you recruit doing it for someone else
and when you do it for someone else
literally what you have to do is set
aside what you want or things that
benefit you
are giving in to your impulses for the
sake of another human being
and the more you do that you train your
muscle that sets aside your impulses
and the more you train your muscle to
set aside your impulses
the more conscientious you will become
the more conscientious you become
the more you will be able to study and
like work
and read instead of playing video games
or watching youtube
or netflix or whatever and that's really
like it's that simple so i've been
you know i put this theory together like
about six seven months ago
and i've been piloting it with a couple
of the clients that i work with and it
actually seems to be working pretty well
that when people start to put themselves
like second instead of putting
themselves first
in their interpersonal relationships
they start to like do things like
there's one person i was working with
that
has a degree and hasn't had a job in
eight years so they like finished their
degree and they like never got a job
and you know for a little while they
were just working on repairing their
interpersonal relationships and like now
they have a job using their degree for
the first time
and it's like it's night and day for
them so here's what i'd say
you know hopefully this works but this
is where you guys have to try it out
right
so like this is where i can propose to
you guys i mean
i'm not the speaker of truth this is
just the hypothesis that i've come up
with which i feel pretty confident about
because i think it's sort of supported
by like eastern theory and western
science
it's sort of anecdotally tested in like
half a dozen of people
and based on my own explorations of mine
and frankly
the healthy gamers so i'm also a great
example of this where i have low
conscientiousness
right so like i suck at this stuff i
have a vata mind
and so if you think about it what is it
that keeps me motivated is like thinking
about you guys
so like over the last week i've written
31 000 words of like maybe a non-fiction
book and like what motivates me to do
that
instead of playing video games it's the
idea that like oh my god
like i may die in like a year or two
years or five years or 10 years
and it would be a real pity if i spent
all my time learning this stuff
and like some random accident happened
and like i didn't
you know like it's weird like i was like
thinking about that and like i only have
a limited amount of time on this earth
so i better
get busy because i won't be around
forever right and i don't mean that to
be like
you know i don't want people to get sad
and stuff i mean it's like it's really
like a cognitive sort of thing
this is where thankfully the sociopathy
within me is it's nice because i can sit
with that thought like without
getting overwhelmed it's just like a
real practicality right
but it's actually thinking about you
guys that motivates me to work like it's
it's thinking about you guys and trying
to help other human beings
that restrains my conscientiousness
which is like pretty low because i'm a
supervisor person
right i'm bad at follow through and all
that kind of good stuff too
and so it kind of works so i encourage
you guys to test it out
right so like try it out for yourselves
and see what happens if you start
putting other people first
and if you do put other people first
like notice what's happening in your
mind when you do that
notice that every time you put someone
else first you have to put yourself
second
and that putting yourself second is
setting aside that impulse
and so every time you do that you're
getting a little bit stronger you're
gaining a little bit of xp
you're leveling up just a tiny well
you're not leveling up because that's
like you know incremental
but you know you're getting xp and then
like what you'll do is you'll notice a
level up
at some point right like you'll notice
that like oh wow i'm actually able to
like clean my room now because
it's weird i wasn't able to do that
that's a level up i'm actually able to
put together my resume i'm actually able
to apply for the job i'm actually able
to
learn this extra thing that i've always
wanted to learn like if you're a
programmer and you like we're like oh
i'd really like to learn this and you
never get around to it
so try and put other people first and if
it doesn't work as a diablo the divine
has a great question
if it doesn't work shocking in the
meantime with your failure you have made
the world a better place
oh [ __ ]
sucks um if you guys want to work
through some of this stuff right so we
teach these concepts the whole reason
that we have a coaching program
is so that like you can work with a
coach to actually like problem solve
your particular issues
and um kind of work through those things
like with someone and then like it tends
to be pretty effective
so coaching is a great way to sort of
explore
like testing and improving your
conscientiousness overcoming laziness
um figuring out like how to implement
changes in your life and things like
that
they'll also help you find a little bit
about your dharma and all that kind of
good stuff
[Music]
okay
uh